feat: article on rspec/jest (#700)
artsy/artsy.github.io: _posts/2021-09-07-what-javascript-tests-could-learn-from-rspec.md

---
layout: epic
title: "What JavaScript Tests Could Learn From RSpec"
date: 2021-09-10
categories: [testing, rspec, jest]
author: steve-hicks
---

TODO: rel="canonical" to the original on my blog

When I started at Artsy a few years ago, I'd never written a line of Ruby. I feel at home with JavaScript — it's
been my buddy since I started my career over 20 years ago. I've written enough tests in JavaScript that I sometimes
feel like I can write them in my sleep (as long as they don't involve async React events 😅).

Most of the code I write at Artsy is still JavaScript, but now I write some Ruby code too, and I've written enough
RSpec tests that I'm starting to form opinions about what I think they should look like.

My most recent work has been JavaScript again. I've been writing Jest tests against one of our React apps. But
rather than reaching for the testing patterns I'd become accustomed to over my years of JavaScripting, I'm finding
that something's missing in my Jest tests! My experiences with RSpec have me longing for two features in Jest:

<!-- more -->

1. `let` blocks
2. `context` blocks

> ## 1. `let` blocks

Reviewer: Minor suggestion, take it or leave it: you could update this header and the next one to be "What's a `let` block?" and "What's a `context` block?", just so that the header very clearly tells you what's coming in that section

[`let` blocks](https://relishapp.com/rspec/rspec-core/v/2-11/docs/helper-methods/let-and-let) are used in an RSpec
test to set things up for your test scenario.

Here's a test for a `Counter` class, verifying that when I call the `increment` method on an instance, its stored
value becomes `1`.

```rb
describe "counter" do

  let(:counter) { Counter.new }

  describe "increment" do
    it "increments by 1" do
      counter.increment

      counter.value.should eq(1)
    end
  end
end
```

If you're new to Ruby, the only line that doesn't translate almost directly to a similar JavaScript expression is
the `let` statement.

> The `let` statement in RSpec creates a thing named `counter`, which is evaluated to a new instance of the `Counter`

Author: > ...creates a thing...

I...don't know what to call this thing other than a thing. If you've got a suggestion, I'm all ears.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `let` statement in RSpec uses Ruby's [method missing magic][rspec-let] to intercept calls and return values from blocks. In this case we have setup `counter` to return a new instance of the `Counter`

[rspec-let]: https://medium.com/@tomkadwill/all-about-rspec-let-a3b642e08d39
```

Author: This was really helpful! I made some slightly different changes, but they were very much inspired by your help here.

class. There are a few important things to note about `let` blocks:

> 1. They're evaluated lazily, so that thing doesn't actually get created until I reference it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. They're evaluated lazily by default, so that thing doesn't actually get created until I reference it. If you want to eager load you can use `let!` to do that.
```

Author: I thought about clarifying that, but thought it might be an unnecessary distraction. I like `by default` - I I'll add that, and think about the `let!` clarification.

Author: I added `by default`! left out the `let!` clarification because I didn't think it was necessary. Thanks for the suggestions!

2. They're memoized, so wherever I reference `counter` within that `describe "counter"` block, I'm getting the same
   instance. It's initialized to whatever I return inside the `let` block.
3. I can override a `let` block deeper inside the tree of tests, by declaring another `let(:counter)` later. When I
   do this, the closest `let` block in the tree for that thing is the one that gets used.

## 2. `context` blocks

A [`context` block](https://relishapp.com/rspec/rspec-core/v/2-11/docs/example-groups/basic-structure-describe-it)
in an RSpec test is, as I understand it, literally the same thing as a `describe` block. Like it's just an alias of
`describe`. What's the point, you ask?

> The difference is in, well, context. Well-organized RSpec tests use `describe` to describe what's being

Reviewer 3: Love your definition here!

more `describe` blocks in JavaScript, but how often have you found JavaScript tests that actually do this? I've
personally seen/written too many tests to count named something like
`it("returns false when the flag is enabled, they're located in the US, but they have brown hair.")`. That's three
scenarios rolled into one test name. It works, but being able to nest different `context` blocks to define my
complex scenarios is much easier to read.

## Examples

Here's an example of some tests I could write in RSpec with `let` and `context`:

```rb
describe "Calculator" do
  let(:calculator) { Calculator.new }

  describe ".multiply" do
    let(:result) { calculator.multiply(first, second) }

    context "when the first value is negative" do
      let(:first) { -1 }

      context "when the second value is negative" do
        let(:second) { -3 }

        it "returns a positive number" do
          result.should eq(3)
        end
      end

      context "when the second value is positive" do
        let(:second) { 3 }

        it "returns a negative number" do
          result.should eq(-3)
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

> HOW COOL IS THAT! Every `describe`/`context` block has _exactly_ the setup data it needs defined clearly inside it.

Reviewer: Love the enthusiasm - it's fun to read a post when the author is excited about the subject!

And each block has very little noise to distract you.

Here's what I'd do in JavaScript/Jest to accomplish something similar:

```JavaScript
describe("Calculator", () => {
  let calculator
  beforeEach(() => { calculator = new Calculator() })

  describe(".multiply", () => {
    let first, second
    function getResult() {
      return calculator.multiply(first, second)
    }

    describe("when the first value is negative", () => {

>       beforeEach(() => { first = -1 })

Reviewer 3: Stealing this for my JS tests brb

      describe("when the second value is negative", () => {
        beforeEach(() => { second = -3 })

        it("returns a positive number", () => {
          expect(getResult()).toEqual(3)
        end

>       end

Reviewer 4: Left a few 'end's lying around.

Author: THANK YOU 🦅 👁️

A [`context` block](https://relishapp.com/rspec/rspec-core/v/2-11/docs/example-groups/basic-structure-describe-it)
in an RSpec test is, as I understand it, literally the same thing as a `describe` block. Like it's just an alias of
`describe`. What's the point, you ask?

The difference is in, well, context. Well-organized RSpec tests use `describe` to describe what's being
tested...and `context` to describe scenarios of the thing being tested.

For example, if I wanted to test the `multiply` method of a `Calculator` class, I might write some test scenarios
that look like this:

```rb
describe "Calculator" do
  describe ".multiply" do
    context "when the first value is negative" do
      context "when the second value is negative" do
        it "returns a positive number" do
        end
      end
      context "when the second value is positive" do
        it "returns a negative number" do
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

See the difference in those test cases between `describe` and `context`? The way I think about it is: if the
statement coming after my `describe`/`context` describes a pre-condition for the test, it's a `context`; otherwise
it's a `describe`.

> `context` wouldn't be hard to implement in JavaScript — I'd bet there are test frameworks that have it. It'd just

Reviewer 5: I'd back adding this alias to jest

Author: I'll look into suggesting it!

Author: @orta is the best way to start this conversation to open a ["feature request" issue](https://github.com/facebook/jest/issues?q=context+label%3A%22%3Arocket%3A+Feature+Request%22)?

the `let` statement.

The `let` statement in RSpec [creates a method with a specified name, which lazily evaluates to the result of a
block][rspec-let]. In this case, we get a method named `counter`, which is evaluated to a new instance of the
`Counter` class. There are a few important things to note about `let` blocks:

1. They're evaluated lazily (by default). That `counter` doesn't actually get created until I reference it.
2. They're memoized. Wherever I reference `counter` within that `describe "counter"` block, I'm getting the same
   instance. It's initialized to whatever I return inside the `let` block.
3. I can override a `let` block deeper inside the tree of tests, by declaring another `let(:counter)` later. When I
   do this, the closest `let` block in the tree for that thing is the one that gets used.

I don't think it's possible to implement `let` in JavaScript — at least not in the way it exists in RSpec. It
relies on
[Ruby meta-programming to intercept calls to missing methods](https://www.leighhalliday.com/ruby-metaprogramming-method-missing),
which just doesn't exist in JavaScript. The [givens](https://github.com/enova/givens) library does something pretty

> close, but it relies on string keys to define things, and there's a bit of extra work when working with TypeScript.

Reviewer 6: I think one could get pretty close to this via a clever use of [Proxies](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Proxy)

      expect(result).toEqual(-3)
    })
  })
})
```

You could certainly make the case for this contrived example that _this_ is actually the most readable set of
tests, because there's less code. I would have a hard time arguing. But most real-life tests are more complex than
these examples, with state and side-effects to mock out, and more scenarios and edge cases worth testing. Each test
case here includes multiple conditions, but there are only two permutations represented. Once things get a little
more complicated than these contrived examples, the RSpec tests become the clear winner for me — they're easier to
read and manage, with their `let` and `context` blocks more discretely describing your test scenarios.

You could also argue that the bigger win here would be breaking scenarios into individual `describe` blocks in
JavaScript tests, instead of cramming the entire scenario into one long `it("...")` statement. I wouldn't argue
that either.

## Caveats

The day after I wrote this article, a conversation started in the Artsy slack about how confusing `let` was because
it moved variable initializations far away from where the tests used them.

> This makes sense! I think it points to two truths in software development:

Reviewer 6: 👍
